PEP 675: Switch to the name `LiteralString` (#2292)
python/peps: pep-0675.rst

    y = literal_identity(hello)
    reveal_type(y)  # => Literal["hello"]

    s: LiteralString
    y2 = literal_identity(s)
    reveal_type(y2)  # => LiteralString

    s_error: str
    literal_identity(s_error)
    # Error: Expected TLiteral (bound to LiteralString), got str.

> ``LiteralString`` can be used as type arguments for generic classes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``LiteralString`` can be used as a type argument for a generic class:
```

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

> ``Literal[str]`` is acceptable at runtime, so

Reviewer: Could instead add a note about adding `LiteralString` to `typing_extensions`.

Author: Ok, I've added a line. Lmk if that looks fine.

Reviewer: Thanks, looks good

for this PEP.

Rejected Names
--------------

We considered a variety of names for the literal string type and
solicited ideas on `typing-sig

> <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/thread/VB74EHNM4RODDFM64NEEEBJQVAUAWIAW/>`_. Some
> notable alternatives were:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/thread/VB74EHNM4RODDFM64NEEEBJQVAUAWIAW/>`_.
Some notable alternatives were:
```

Formatting nitpick

Author: Can we add a lint rule for this? I like the other RST checks as part of the pre-commit tests. I don't know what is wrong here. (I just use `fill-paragraph` in Emacs.)

Reviewer 2: Its just a formatting nitpick; doesn't actually affect anything. For whatever reason `fill-paragraph` is not adding the break before `Some` despite it being at the end of a sentence and it being far over the maximum column width, either because it is getting confused about RST syntax or it doesn't have two spaces after periods. Allowing One Line Per Sentence fur future PEPs instead of just old-fashioned hard breaks would fix all of these issues and much more, and make reviews much easier and diffs much cleaner, but I've yet to formally propose it since I've been focused on more important things first.

+ ``Literal[str]``: This is a natural extension of the

>   ``Literal["foo"]`` type name but typing-sig `objected

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ``Literal["foo"]`` type name, but typing-sig `objected
```

Missing comma

  <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/message/2ZQO4NTJEI42KTRJDBL77MNANEXOW7UI/>`_
  that users could mistake this for the literal type of the ``str``
  class.

> + ``LiteralStr``: This is shorter than ``LiteralString`` but looks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ ``LiteralStr``: This is shorter than ``LiteralString``, but looks
```

Missing comma

Author: No, it's not an independent clause.

Reviewer 2: Looks like this was not applied.

Author: Yes, and I explained why I did not apply it: "looks weird to the authors" is not an independent clause. We don't add a comma before "but" in those cases.

Reviewer 2: It wasn't syntactically required, but it sounded better to me as a copyeditor in terms of how I read it. Reading it again, though, and getting a second opinion from my sister (a professional writer, whom I sometimes copyedit for), I agree you're right that it sounds fine without it.

  weird to the PEP authors.

+ ``LiteralDerivedString``: This (along with
  ``MadeFromLiteralString``) best captures the technical meaning of
  the type. It represents not just the type of literal expressions

>   such as ``"foo"`` but also that of expressions composed from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  such as ``"foo"``, but also that of expressions composed from
```

Missing comma

Author: Same - not an independent clause.

Reviewer 2: This too

Author: Same as above, I explained why I did not apply it.

Reviewer 2: Actually, I made an mistake here that my sister spotted when giving me a second opinion on this—`such as ``"foo"`` ` should be set off by commas, rather than just having only a single comma after it. I'll make another suggestion to that effect.

  literals ``"foo" + "bar"``. However, both names seem wordy.

+ ``StringLiteral``: Users might confuse this with the existing,

>   unrelated concept of "string literals" in languages like `C++

Reviewer: Or Python? Not sure why you need to go to C++.

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#string-and-bytes-literals

Also, not sure I'd describe the concept as "unrelated"; string literals are a subset of `LiteralString`s.

  <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/string_literal>`_.

+ ``SafeString``: While this comes close to our intended meaning, it
  may mislead users into thinking that the string has been sanitized in
  some way, perhaps by escaping HTML tags or shell-related special
  characters.

+ ``ConstantStr``: This does not capture the idea of composing literal
  strings.

+ ``StaticStr``: This suggests that the string is statically
  computable, i.e., without running the program, which is not true. The
  literal string may vary based on runtime flags, as seen in the
  `Motivation`_ examples.

> Overall, there was no clear winner on typing-sig over a long period,

Reviewer: This doesn't list any options that are parameterized over the type, such as `LiteralOnly[str]`. That would have the advantage that it's easy to extend to more types (like bytes, as suggested below). Do you think it's worth discussing?

Feel free to disregard this if you don't think it's important enough.

so we decided to tip the scales in favor of ``LiteralString``.

``LiteralBytes``
----------------

We could generalize literal byte types such as ``Literal[b"foo"]`` to
``LiteralBytes``. However, literal byte types are used much less
frequently than literal string types and we did not find much user

> demand for ``LiteralBytes``, so we decided not to include it in this
> PEP. Others may however consider it in future PEPs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
demand for ``LiteralBytes``, so we decided not to include it here.
It could, however, be added in a future PEP.
```

Improve phrasing and fix repetition

Author: Eh, I prefer the parallelism of the original.

Reviewer 2: This wasn't applied and went stale; I remade it.

for this PEP.

Rejected Names
--------------

We considered a variety of names for the literal string type and
solicited ideas on `typing-sig
<https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/thread/VB74EHNM4RODDFM64NEEEBJQVAUAWIAW/>`_.
Some notable alternatives were:

+ ``Literal[str]``: This is a natural extension of the
  ``Literal["foo"]`` type name, but typing-sig `objected
  <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/message/2ZQO4NTJEI42KTRJDBL77MNANEXOW7UI/>`_
  that users could mistake this for the literal type of the ``str``
  class.

+ ``LiteralStr``: This is shorter than ``LiteralString`` but looks
  weird to the PEP authors.

+ ``LiteralDerivedString``: This (along with
  ``MadeFromLiteralString``) best captures the technical meaning of

>   the type. It represents not just the type of literal expressions
>   such as ``"foo"`` but also that of expressions composed from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the type. It represents not just the type of literal expressions,
  such as ``"foo"``, but also that of expressions composed from
```

See above:

> Actually, I made an oversight here that my sister spotted when giving me a second opinion on this—`such as ``"foo"`` ` should be set off by commas, rather than just having only a single comma after it. I'll make another suggestion to that effect.

  whereas our concept is more general.

+ ``SafeString``: While this comes close to our intended meaning, it
  may mislead users into thinking that the string has been sanitized in
  some way, perhaps by escaping HTML tags or shell-related special
  characters.

+ ``ConstantStr``: This does not capture the idea of composing literal
  strings.

+ ``StaticStr``: This suggests that the string is statically
  computable, i.e., without running the program, which is not true. The
  literal string may vary based on runtime flags, as seen in the
  `Motivation`_ examples.

+ ``LiteralOnly[str]``: This has the advantage of being extensible to
  other literal types such as ``bytes`` or ``int``. However, we did
  not find the extensibility worth the loss of readability.

Overall, there was no clear winner on typing-sig over a long period,
so we decided to tip the scales in favor of ``LiteralString``.

``LiteralBytes``
----------------

We could generalize literal byte types such as ``Literal[b"foo"]`` to
``LiteralBytes``. However, literal byte types are used much less
frequently than literal string types and we did not find much user

> demand for ``LiteralBytes``, so we decided not to include it in this
> PEP. Others may, however, consider it in future PEPs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
demand for ``LiteralBytes``, so we decided not to include it here.
It could, however, be added in a future PEP.
```

This suggestion (to "Improve phrasing and fix repetition") went stale because changes were pushed after it was made but before it was applied, so I re-made it. As a general rule, its good to always apply suggestions before making other, more substantive changes.

Reviewer: Pradeep commented on this and a few other suggestions why he preferred not to apply them. I'd like to leave that decision to him as the author.

From my perspective this is ready to merge.

Author: No, I did not miss it. I replied to the original suggestion with the reason why I did not apply it (I preferred the parallelism of the original version).

Reviewer 2: I now see commas were added around `however`, which was the really critical change; the rest I yield to your judgement.

        return "".join(output)

We could mitigate the above using linting, code review, etc., but
ultimately a clever, malicious developer attempting to circumvent the
protections offered by ``LiteralString`` will always succeed. The
important thing to remember is that ``LiteralString`` is not intended
to protect against *malicious* developers; it is meant to protect
against benign developers accidentally using sensitive APIs in a
dangerous way (without getting in their way otherwise).

Without ``LiteralString``, the best enforcement tool API authors have
is documentation, which is easily ignored and often not seen. With
``LiteralString``, API misuse requires conscious thought and artifacts
in the code that reviewers and future developers can notice.

.. _appendix_C:

Appendix C: ``str`` methods that preserve ``LiteralString``
===========================================================

The ``str`` class has several methods that would benefit from
``LiteralString``. For example, users might expect
``"hello".capitalize()`` to have the type ``LiteralString`` similar to
the other examples we have seen in the `Inferring LiteralString

> <inferring_literal_string>`_ section. Inferring the type ``LiteralString``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<inferring_literal_string_>`_ section. Inferring the type ``LiteralString``
```

Syntax mistake

Author: I swear RST is the least memorizable syntax I've ever come across. I can never recall how to link to something :| Thank goodness we have Markdown elsewhere.

(Why didn't the RST pre-commit checks catch this?)

Reviewer 2: > I swear RST is the least memorizable syntax I've ever come across. I can never recall how to link to something :| Thank goodness we have Markdown elsewhere.

Heh, no worries; I've had multiple PEP editors (including the writer of the new build system) think this wasn't required, due to the different rules for implicit references vs. explicit reference roles. There are a number of things that could be more intuitive and user-friendly about RST, links being the worst offender, but with Sphinx it is far more powerful than Markdown when it comes to its functionality for documentation and things like the PEP repo; a lot of what we do here simply wouldn't be possible without RST's extensible roles, directives and structured style.

> (Why didn't the RST pre-commit checks catch this?)

There isn't currently a check for this, but I could write a new one. However, assuming PEP-0676 is accepted, once the new Sphinx build system is the default, you can just use the standard `:ref:` role to link sections, which doesn't have this problem and also has the section name as its default inline text, so instead of

```rst
`Inferring LiteralString <inferring_literal_string_>`_
```

you could just do

```rst
:ref:`inferring_literal_string`
```
